.github/DEVELOPMENT.md, before:

# Development

After [forking the repo from GitHub](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo) and [installing pnpm](https://pnpm.io/installation):

```shell
git clone https://github.com/ < your-name-here > /formatly
cd formatly
pnpm install
```

> This repository includes a list of suggested VS Code extensions.
> It's a good idea to use [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com) and accept its suggestion to install them, as they'll help with development.

## Building

Run [**tsup**](https://tsup.egoist.dev) locally to build source files from `src/` into output files in `lib/`:

```shell
pnpm build
```

Add `--watch` to run the builder in a watch mode that continuously cleans and recreates `lib/` as you save files:

```shell
pnpm build --watch
```

## Formatting

[Prettier](https://prettier.io) is used to format code.
It should be applied automatically when you save files in VS Code or make a Git commit.

To manually reformat all files, you can run:

```shell
pnpm format --write
```

## Linting

This package includes several forms of linting to enforce consistent code quality and styling.
Each should be shown in VS Code, and can be run manually on the command-line:

- `pnpm lint` ([ESLint](https://eslint.org) with [typescript-eslint](https://typescript-eslint.io)): Lints JavaScript and TypeScript source files
- `pnpm lint:knip` ([knip](https://github.com/webpro/knip)): Detects unused files, dependencies, and code exports
- `pnpm lint:md` ([Markdownlint](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint)): Checks Markdown source files
- `pnpm lint:packages` ([pnpm dedupe --check](https://pnpm.io/cli/dedupe)): Checks for unnecessarily duplicated packages in the `pnpm-lock.yml` file
- `pnpm lint:spelling` ([cspell](https://cspell.org)): Spell checks across all source files

Read the individual documentation for each linter to understand how it can be configured and used best.

For example, ESLint can be run with `--fix` to auto-fix some lint rule complaints:

```shell
pnpm run lint --fix
```

Note that you'll need to run `pnpm build` before `pnpm lint` so that lint rules which check the file system can pick up on any built files.

## Testing

[Vitest](https://vitest.dev) is used for tests.
You can run it locally on the command-line:

```shell
pnpm run test
```

Add the `--coverage` flag to compute test coverage and place reports in the `coverage/` directory:

```shell
pnpm run test --coverage
```

Note that [console-fail-test](https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/console-fail-test) is enabled for all test runs.
Calls to `console.log`, `console.warn`, and other console methods will cause a test to fail.

### Debugging Tests

This repository includes a [VS Code launch configuration](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging) for debugging unit tests.
To launch it, open a test file, then run _Debug Current Test File_ from the VS Code Debug panel (or press F5).

## Type Checking

You should be able to see suggestions from [TypeScript](https://typescriptlang.org) in your editor for all open files.

However, it can be useful to run the TypeScript command-line (`tsc`) to type check all files in `src/`:

```shell
pnpm tsc
```

Add `--watch` to keep the type checker running in a watch mode that updates the display as you save files:

```shell
pnpm tsc --watch
```

Commit message:

fix: bump to create-typescript-app@2 with transitions action (#81)
## PR Checklist

- [x] Addresses an existing open issue: fixes #74
- [x] That issue was marked as [`status: accepting
prs`](https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/formatly/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22status%3A+accepting+prs%22)
- [x] Steps in
[CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/formatly/blob/main/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md)
were taken

## Overview

Runs `npx create-typescript-app --add-cta-transitions` and adds a
`create-typescript-app.config.js` to keep template customizations
through automated transitions over time.

Marking as a `fix:` because this template update removes sourcemaps from
built packages.

🧼

.github/DEVELOPMENT.md, after:

# Development

After [forking the repo from GitHub](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo) and [installing pnpm](https://pnpm.io/installation):

```shell
git clone https://github.com/(your-name-here)/formatly
cd formatly
pnpm install
```

> This repository includes a list of suggested VS Code extensions.
> It's a good idea to use [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com) and accept its suggestion to install them, as they'll help with development.

## Building

Run [**tsup**](https://tsup.egoist.dev) locally to build source files from `src/` into output files in `lib/`:

```shell
pnpm build
```

Add `--watch` to run the builder in a watch mode that continuously cleans and recreates `lib/` as you save files:

```shell
pnpm build --watch
```

### Built App Debugging

This repository includes a [VS Code launch configuration](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging) for debugging.
To debug a `bin` app, add a breakpoint to your code, then run _Debug Program_ from the VS Code Debug panel (or press F5).
VS Code will automatically run the `build` task in the background before running `bin/index.mjs`.

## Formatting

[Prettier](https://prettier.io) is used to format code.
It should be applied automatically when you save files in VS Code or make a Git commit.

To manually reformat all files, you can run:

```shell
pnpm format --write
```

## Linting

This package includes several forms of linting to enforce consistent code quality and styling.
Each should be shown in VS Code, and can be run manually on the command-line:

- `pnpm lint` ([ESLint](https://eslint.org) with [typescript-eslint](https://typescript-eslint.io)): Lints JavaScript and TypeScript source files
- `pnpm lint:knip` ([knip](https://github.com/webpro/knip)): Detects unused files, dependencies, and code exports
- `pnpm lint:md` ([Markdownlint](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint)): Checks Markdown source files
- `pnpm lint:packages` ([pnpm dedupe --check](https://pnpm.io/cli/dedupe)): Checks for unnecessarily duplicated packages in the `pnpm-lock.yml` file
- `pnpm lint:spelling` ([cspell](https://cspell.org)): Spell checks across all source files

Read the individual documentation for each linter to understand how it can be configured and used best.

For example, ESLint can be run with `--fix` to auto-fix some lint rule complaints:

```shell
pnpm run lint --fix
```

Note that you'll need to run `pnpm build` before `pnpm lint` so that lint rules which check the file system can pick up on any built files.

## Testing

[Vitest](https://vitest.dev) is used for tests.
You can run it locally on the command-line:

```shell
pnpm run test
```

Add the `--coverage` flag to compute test coverage and place reports in the `coverage/` directory:

```shell
pnpm run test --coverage
```

Note that [console-fail-test](https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/console-fail-test) is enabled for all test runs.
Calls to `console.log`, `console.warn`, and other console methods will cause a test to fail.

### Debugging Tests

This repository includes a [VS Code launch configuration](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging) for debugging unit tests.
To launch it, open a test file, then run _Debug Current Test File_ from the VS Code Debug panel (or press F5).

## Type Checking

You should be able to see suggestions from [TypeScript](https://typescriptlang.org) in your editor for all open files.

However, it can be useful to run the TypeScript command-line (`tsc`) to type check all files in `src/`:

```shell
pnpm tsc
```

Add `--watch` to keep the type checker running in a watch mode that updates the display as you save files:

```shell
pnpm tsc --watch
```
